DrugEx RELEASE NOTES
====================

DrugEx (Drug Explorer): An explaration strategy improves the diversity of de novo drug design using deep reinforcement learning

By Xuhan Liu & Gerard J.P. van Westen, on November 1st 2018

Please see the LICENSE file for the license terms for the software. Basically it's free to academic users. If you do wish to sell the software or use it in a commercial product, then please contact the following E-mails,

Xuhan Liu (First Author): x.liu@lacdr.leidenuniv.nl 

or

Gerard J.P. van Westen (Corespondent Author): gerard@lacdr.leidenuniv.nl


Introduction
=============
Over the last five years deep learning has progressed tremendously in both image recognition and natural language processing. Now it is increasingly applied to other data rich fields. In drug discovery, recurrent neural networks (RNNs) have been shown to be an effective method to generate novel chemical structures in the form of SMILES. However, ligands generated by current methods have so far provided relatively low diversity and do not fully cover the whole chemical space occupied by known ligands. Here, we propose a new method (DrugEx) to discover de novo drug-like molecules. DrugEx is an RNN model (generator) trained through a special exploration strategy integrated into reinforcement learning. As a case study we applied our method to design ligands against the adenosine A2A receptor. From ChEMBL data, a machine learning model (predictor) was created to predict whether generated molecules are active or not. Based on this predictor as the reward function, the generator was trained by reinforcement learning without any further data. We then compared the performance of our method with two previously published methods, REINVENT and ORGANIC. We found that candidate molecules our model designed, and predicted to be active, had a larger chemical diversity and better covered the chemical space of known ligands compared to the state-of-the-art.

Dependencies
============
Firstly, ensure that the version of your Python >= 3.5.

Secondly, all the following packages are installed in your machine:

    1. Numpy: (version >= 1.14)

        tcsh% pip install numpy

    2. Scikit-Learn (version >= 0.18)

        tcsh% pip install scikit-learn

    3. Pandas (version >= 0.22)

        tcsh% pip install pandas

    4. PyTorch (version == 1.0)

        tcsh% conda install pytorch torchvision cudatoolkit=8.0 -c pytorch 
        
        Note: it depends on the GPU device and CUDA tookit (version not lower than 8.0)

    5. Matplotlib (version >= 2.0)

        tcsh% pip install matplotlib

References
==========
Liu, Xuhan; Ye, Kai; Van Vlijmen, Herman; IJzerman, Adriaan P.; Van westen, Gerard JP (2018): An Exploration Strategy Improves the Diversity of de novo Ligands Using Deep Reinforcement Learning – A Case for the Adenosine A2A Receptor. ChemRxiv. Preprint.
https://doi.org/10.26434/chemrxiv.7436789.v2


Acknowledgement
===============
We thank the code of REINVENT at https://github.com/MarcusOlivecrona/REINVENT gave me a lot of inspirations.
